---
layout: post
title: CERN Hack days
excerpt: "An account of my visits to CERN in September 2013, February and March 2019"
category: weblog
--- 

CERN Hack days, September 2013 and February + March 2019
=========================================================

CERN is a Casino! ... for Physicists ... Wanted to be a little dramatic at the beginning of the article and could not really find a better form of entry than that :) 

On a more serious note, CERN houses the largest and most complicated Scientific experiment ever carried out by human beings. Someone else had likened CERN to an airport and the analogy also fits quite well with what goes on at the facility. Essentially what you have there is infrastcture to carry out high-energy Particle Physics experiments at energy levels that are not attainable *yet* in other laboratories around the globe. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is a circular tunnel in which protons from hydrogen nuclei (mostly) are accelerated at close to the speed of light. The actual figure is 99.999999% of light speed (0.99999999 * c). Every once in a while, the beams have their paths crossed over and a collission occurs at an average rate of 40 - 60 million times a second. The energy produced by such activities are so intense that really tiny points heat up to be hotter than the core of our Sun, in effect becoming the hotest points in the observable Universe. At the same time, new particles are created and for those few fractions of a second that "daughter" particles come into existence, Physicists can actually get a glimpse of what the Cosmos looked like moments after it began to expand in a phase that is now referred as the "Inflation". Amazing!! 

This is in essence necessitated by the fact that there were durations when the early Universe was not transparent to light. This means that telescopes can only observe only so far back into the beginning of time, excluding about the first 300,000 years of its life from what is visually perceptible. It is these kinds of simulations into the very beginning of time that prompted the creation of the distributed hypertext / World-Wide Web system at CERN. So much data is collected by giant detectors at collision points run and maintained by the various experiments (ATLAS, CMS, ALICE, LHC-b and TOTEM) for later analysis by the disparate Scientific collaborations consisting of at least 10,000 individual Scientists and Engineers in total. That fast became a source of regular frustration for the organization to keep track of what was going on and when / where / by who. The inventor of the document Web, Sir. Tim Berners-Lee, decided to focus on the problem and do something about it. Later on it was reported that CERN only hoped to change the way it works internally with the new tool that had been created, it ended up changing the rest of the world for good.

Fast forward to 2013 (Approximately 13.7 billion years after the creation of the Universe ...)

I had been living in Kenya since birth a little over 30 years before then and for two years prior to 2013, was involved in the organizing of a Science event known as "Science hack day" locally in the country's capital city, Nairobi. The main aim of Science hack day is to bring together scientists, artists, developers, designers, mathematicians, engineers plus all sorts of awesome people into the same physical space for a period of 48 hours so that they can build even more amazing stuff together. At the end of April 2013, I had seen a post on CERN's website making an announcement that the free and open Web had been in existence for the last 25 years which called for a celebration of sorts. I was thrilled at the news and decided to leave a comment at the end of the article expressing my excitement and wishing CERN's Web team good luck in restoring the website of the first Web server and parts of the server environment for members of the general public. I also mentioned briefly what I did for a living (software development) as per the request on the post. I must have been the very first person to write and got a response from CERN a few minutes later sounding equally bubbly about my feedback to their (We)b-log post. In addition, the writer made a polite request asking me to make an application to participate in a project to restore the Universal Line-mode browser, the second free browser authored by an intern, Nicola Pellow, in 1990 at CERN. That was in the first week of June 2013 and honestly, it was one of the highlights of my year and probably a peak in my natural life too.

A month later in mid-July 2013, another e-mail message was sent by the Web manager at CERN heartily congratulating me as being one of a handful of people who had been selected to participate in a Hack day at CERN in September 2013 for the restoration of the original website and parts of the first Web server. That piece of news was so unbelievable that, for the next two months, I literally ended up checking the web page with the list of participants skeptically each day for the removal of my name quickly followed by an apology (hopefully) from CERN explaining that there had been a truly random clerical error made in the whole selection and announcement stages of the project. I kid you not!

Eventually, I showed up in September 18th - 19th 2013 after going through the whole Schengen VISA application process at the Swiss embassy in Nairobi. It was intimidating to say the least to be in the prescence of such highly talented Web designers and developers from all over the world at the premiere Physics lab in Europe. My "impostor syndrome" consumed me so much that saying that I felt wildly out of place would be a gross understatement. At that time, my task was to carry out research into the Web's early history and eventually publish the content into the story-telling website that would accompany the Universal Line-mode browser's emulator release that was built in just two days of hacking by the rest of the team. The final output was quite decent and is publicly available. 

CERN hack days 2019 

This time I was in Canada and had completed my graduate studies at the University of Alberta. My research group was in the UofA's Simulations and Modeling laboratory for Construction Engineering and Management where I worked under the supervision of Dr. Simaan AbouRizk from January 2016 to June 2018. CERN had the intention to restore the first Web browser ever that had been written by Sir. Tim Berners-Lee in about four months on a NeXt machine from March 1989, the WorldWideWeb browser. The people involved in planning for the project had figured out that it would be much simpler to reunite the team that had worked in 2013 on the Universal line-mode browser's emulator back at CERN to perform a similar task like the previous time. I jumped at the opportunity, only that this time I felt more confident about my abilities to effectively contribute as compared to the previous visit. Also, we had been invited for a slightly longer period, five days, and over the *Valentine's day week* which to me symbolized some form of love from the entire Science and Technology community!!  As usual, we were given one task and left with complete discretion as to how to go about it. 

Most of us performed similar tasks to what we had been engaged in during the 2013 visit. My role was to work on the story-telling bit once more only that this time, I got to write some bit of mark-down "code" for the static site generator we were using for the project, Eleventy. I also helped out in connecting to the replica of the NeXT machine that had been borrowed from the Science museum at Laussane for us to work with on the project over a wired ethernet network. Kimberly Blessing and I managed to get a copy of an earlier version of the WorldWideWeb (later renamed to Nexus) browser from a copy of Sir. Tim Berners-Lee hard drive that has been preserved on a Compact Disc. Had to install a light-weight ftp server on my laptop, connect the NeXT machine to the network and assign both the NeXT machine and my laptop static I.P addresses inside CERN's local area network so that we could transfer WorldWideWeb setup files copied from my machine to it for installation.

Our day started off with us watching a video of someone who had a running copy of the WorldWideWeb browser on an actual NeXT machine. We also got to talk to and work with some of the Web pioneers, namely Jean-François Groff and Robert Cailliau. Some other highlights of our stay include our visit to a restaurant downtown to eat the best Swiss fondeu near lake Geneva, a guided tour of the SynchroCyclotron (SC), the oldest accelerator at CERN dated 1956, now the star of a really cool projection show by Dr. James Gillies. We also did all our coding from CERN's data centre and had a breath-taking visit to the extremely high perfomance computing infrastructure that collects the data produced by all Physics experiments when the LHC is fully operational. Last but not least we had a brief tour of the first Linear Accelerato (LINAC) after completing our project at the end of the week's hackathon.

Web @ 30 celebrations 

This event occured on the 12th of March to mark 30 years from the time that the original proposal for the World-Wide Web system was authored by Sir. Tim Berners-Lee. It was a fairly colourful day attended by pioneers of the Web technology and leading thinkers in the field. The host was the current director general at CERN, Fabiola Gianotti. The guest  of honour, Sir. Tim Berners-Lee and his close collaborators from the early days expressed some form of disappointment with the current state of the system and urged participants from all over the world to consider the original intentions of his inventions, then work towards restoring it to its ideal state. The Web had its initial design as being purely decentralized, free of surveillance and exploitation / has real privacy, beneficial to all regardless of physical location and status in society, totally collaborative when first conceived. 

In summary 

Similar to the way Physcisits get to peek at early conditions of the Universe, we engaged in a "Digital archeology" exercise at the same laboratory where the technology came from 30 years ago. The main aim was to recreate an experience of the World-Wide Web system as what it was at its inception for many people who did not have the opportunity (luxury in real sense) to do so first hand. That for many of us is an eye-opening experience to view how such a simplistic (now) piece of technology has had a profound impact on many spheres of our lives as human beings and still continues to do so well into the foreseeable future.
