
CERN hack days 2019

This time I was in Canada and had completed my graduate studies at the University of Alberta. My research group was in the UofA's Simulations and Modeling laboratory for Construction Engineering and Management where I worked under the supervision of Dr. Simaan AbouRizk from January 2016 to June 2018. CERN had the intention to restore the first Web browser ever that had been written by Sir. Tim Berners-Lee in about four months on a NeXt machine from March 1989, the WorldWideWeb browser. The people involved in planning for the project had figured out that it would be much simpler to reunite the team that had worked in 2013 on the Universal line-mode browser's emulator back at CERN and perform a similar task like the previous time. I jumped at the opportunity, only that this time I felt more confident about my abilities compared to the visit. Also, we had been invited for a slightly longer duration, five days, and over the *Valentine's day week* which to me symbolized some form of love from the entire Science and Technology world!!  As usual, we were given one task and left with total discretion on how to go about it.

Most of us performed similar tasks to what we had been engaged in during the 2013 visit. My role was to work on the story-telling bit once more only that this time, I got to write some little mark-down "code" for the static site generator we were using for the project, Eleventy. I also helped out in connecting to the replica of the NeXT machine that had been borrowed from the Science museum at Laussane for us to work with in the project over a wired ethernet network. Kimberly [Blessing] and I managed to get a copy of an earlier version of the WorldWideWeb (later renamed to Nexus) browser from a copy of Sir. Tim Berners-Lee hard drive that has been burned to a Compact Disc. Had to install a quick ftp server on my laptop, connect the NeXT machine to the network and assign both the NeXT machine and my laptop static I.P addresses inside CERN's local area network so that we could transfer files copied from my machine to it for installation.

Our day started off with us watcing a video of someone who had a running copy of the WorldWideWeb browser on an actual NeXT machine. We also got to talk to and work with some of the Web pioneers, namely Jean Francoise-Groff and Robert Cailliau. Some other highlights of our stay include our visit to a restaurant downtown to eat the best Swiss foundeau near lake Geneva, a guided tour of the SynchrotonCyclotron (SC), the oldest experiment at CERN dated 1956 by Dr. James Gillies. We also did all our coding from CERN's main data centre and had a breath-taking visit to the extremely high perfomance computing infrastructure that collects all the data produced by all Physics experiments when the LHC is running. Last but not least we had a quick tour of the first Linear Accelerator, LINAC after completing our project at the end of the week's hackathon.

Web @ 30 celebrations

This event occured on the 12th of March to mark 30 years from the time that the original proposal for the World-Wide Web system was authored by Sir. Tim Berners-Lee. It was a fairly colourful day attended by pioneers of the Web technology and leading thinkers in the field. The host was the current director general at CERN, Fabiola Gianotti. The guest  of honour, Sir. Tim Berners-Lee and his close collaborators from the early days expressed some form of disappointment with the current state of the system and urged participants from all over the world to consider the original intentions of his inventions, then work towards restoring it to its ideal state.
~                                                                                                                                             
"cern_hack_days.txt" 28L, 9166C written                                                                                     24,854        Bot
